IN HIS LIFE AND IN HIS WORK,
THE SPANISH PLAYWRIGHT
PEDRO CALDERON DE LA
BARCA BROUGHT TOGETHER
THE MAGNIFICENCE,
THE HORROR, AND THE
INHERENT CONTRADICTIONS
OF THE SPANISH GOLDEN AGE.
ALTHOUGH HE LIVED TO BE
81, BY THE AGE OF 40
HE HAD ALREADY WRITTEN
THE PLAYS THAT WOULD
MAKE HIM A MAJOR FIGURE
OF WORLD THEATRE.
AMONG THEM WERE "THE
MAYOR OF ZALAMEA",
AND HIS MASTERPIECE,
"LA VIDA ES SUEÑO".
HIS EXTENSIVE BODY OF
THEATRICAL WORK IS RIFE
WITH CONTRADICTIONS
AND COMPLEXITIES.
HIS STYLE IS DIVERSE
IN ITS TONES,
REVEALING MULTIPLE AND
PROFOUND MEANINGS, AND
MAINTAINS AN AURA OF VIGOR
AND EXCITEMENT TO THIS DAY.
*
AND I, TOO,
DREAM AND BEHOLD.
I DREAM I AM BOUND WITH
CHAINS, AND I DREAMED THAT
THESE PRESENT PAINS WERE
FORTUNATE WAYS OF OLD.
WHAT IS LIFE?
A TALE THAT IS TOLD.
A FRENZY EXTREME, A SHADOW
OF THINGS THAT SEEM;
AND THE GREATEST
GOOD IS BUT SMALL,
THAT ALL LIFE IS
A DREAM TO ALL,
AND THAT DREAMS
THEMSELVES ARE A DREAM.
PEDRO CALDERÓN DE LA BARCA
WAS BORN IN MADRID
ON JANUARY 17, 1600.
DESPITE HIS MOTHER'S EARLY
DEATH AND HIS FATHER'S
STERN, AUTHORITARIAN
ATTITUDE, YOUNG PEDRO
HAD A HAPPY CHILDHOOD
WITH HIS TWO BROTHERS,
DIEGO AND JOSÉ.
AT THE AGE OF NINE HE
ENTERED THE IMPERIAL SCHOOL
OF THE JESUITS WHERE
HE STUDIED HUMANITIES
AND BECAME FAMILIAR
WITH THE LATIN CLASSICS.
FIVE YEARS LATER HE
ENTERED THE UNIVERSITY
OF ALCALÁ TO CONTINUE
HIS EDUCATION.
UPON THE DEATH OF HIS FATHER
HE MOVED TO SALAMANCA
TO STUDY CANONS AND LAW IN
ORDER TO BECOME A PRIEST.
BUT IN 1620 HE DECIDED
TO ABANDON SCHOOL
AND HIS PURSUIT
OF THE PRIESTHOOD.
HE BECAME FASCINATED
BY THE NEW COMEDY
THAT WAS FLOURISHING
IN MADRID AT THE TIME
AND SOON FOUND HIMSELF
TAKING THE FIRST
TENTATIVE STEPS ON
HIS LITERARY JOURNEY.
IN 1621 PHILIP IV WAS
CROWNED KING OF SPAIN
UNDER THE PATRONAGE OF THE
COUNT DUKE OF OLIVARES.
IT WAS THE BEGINNING OF
A NEW AGE IN WHICH SPAIN
WOULD BE A EUROPEAN POWER
TO BE RECKONED WITH.
THIS PERIOD OF
POLITICAL AGGRESSIVENESS
CORRESPONDED WITH
THE ARTISTIC SUCCESS
OF CALDERÓN DE LA BARCA.
IN 1623, WITH THE PRINCE
OF WALES' VISIT TO MADRID,
CALDERÓN PRESENTED
"LOVE, HONOR, AND POWER",
HIS FIRST SUCCESSFUL PLAY,
AT THE ROYAL PALACE.
CALDERÓN CAME TO ADOPT THE
AESTHETICS OF LOPE DE VEGA,
THE GREAT ARCHITECT
OF SPANISH THEATER.
HE ESCHEWED CLASSICAL
CONCEPTS, HELD IMAGINATIVE
DISCOURSE IN HIGH REGARD,
AND HE WAS WILLING TO
TAKE ON ANY SUBJECT
AND EXAMINE IT
THROUGH THE PRISM
OF SPANISH FOLKLORE.
HE DISCOUNTED ANACHRONISMS
AND FOREIGN SCENES IN FAVOR
OF A THEATER THAT WAS
QUINTESSENTIALLY SPANISH.
IN HIS QUEST FOR
AUTHENTICITY,
CALDERÓN WOULD
PROVIDE THE THEATER
WITH A NEW, HIGHLY
POETIC STYLE,
ONE IN WHICH IDEOLOGY
SUPERSEDES ACTION,
WHERE THE CHARACTERS
DRIFT AWAY FROM REALITY
AND ACQUIRE ANOTHER,
HIGHLY SYMBOLIC EXISTENCE.
OH, CRUEL HEAVEN.
I HAVE THE RIGHT TO KNOW
WHY I AM TREATED SO.
HAVE I SOMEHOW OFFENDED
YOU IN BEING BORN?
THOUGH IT IS TRUE MAN'S
GREATEST CRIME IS TO BE BORN.
IN 1629 CALDERÓN PRESENTED
"THE CONSTANT PRINCE",
AN EXAMPLE OF ANOTHER
STRONG THEME OF HIS DRAMA:
LYRICAL PRESENCE, A BLEND OF
POETRY AND DRAMATIC ACTION.
THAT SAME YEAR, CALDERÓN
WROTE THE COMEDIES
"THE PHANTOM LADY"
AND "A HOUSE WITH TWO DOORS
IS DIFFICULT TO GUARD".
IN THESE WITTY PLAYS, RIFE
WITH COINCIDENCES THAT
STRAIN BELIEF, THE THEATER
BECOMES A SORT OF COMIC GAME.
HOWEVER, THESE COMEDIES
CONTAINED ASTUTE
OBSERVATIONS OF THE
CUSTOMS, IDEAS, FEELINGS
AND STANDARDS OF
CALDERÓN'S TIME.
RESPECT AND JEALOUSY
ARE RECURRENT THEMES
THROUGHOUT
CALDERÓN'S WORK.
IN HIS COMEDIES, THERE IS
OFTEN A SINGLE WOMAN WHO
REMAINS UNDER THE CARE OF
HER PARENTS AND BROTHERS,
WHO TEND TO COME UP WITH
EXAGGERATED AND OFTEN
RUTHLESS SOLUTIONS
TO EVERYDAY PROBLEMS.
IN THE END, HOWEVER,
A MARRIAGE TYPICALLY
PAVES THE WAY TO
A HAPPY ENDING.
BY CONTRAST, IN HIS
TRAGEDIES, CALDERÓN OFTEN
SETS THE CONFLICT AROUND
A MARRIED WOMAN WITH AN
OUTCOME THAT IS
INEVITABLY HEARTBREAKING.
HONOR IS ONE OF THE
MOST IMPORTANT SUBJECTS
IN CALDERÓN'S WORK.
LOPE DE VEGA DEFINED THE
FORMULAS OF THE SPANISH
DRAMATIC CANON AND TURNED
HONOR, WITH ALL ITS
CONVENTIONS, INTO
A THEATRICAL THEME.
BUT IT WAS CALDERÓN
WHO TOOK THIS THEME
TO THE NEXT LEVEL.
WITH THE HELP OF HIS
PATRON, PHILIP IV,
CALDERÓN BEGAN TO WRITE
AND DIRECT FOR THE COURT.
FROM THIS POINT ON, HIS
FAME WOULD CONTINUE
TO GROW TO THE
END OF HIS DAYS.
IN 1634 HE WROTE THE
PHILOSOPHICAL DRAMA
"LA VIDA ES SUEÑO", A PLAY
THAT IS CONSIDERED BY MANY
TO BE THE MOST
IMPORTANT OF HIS WORKS.
FOR ALL OF ITS
PHILOSOPHICAL WEIGHTINESS,
THE DOMINANT THEME OF
"LA VIDA ES SUEÑO"
IS A PROFOUND SENSE OF
PESSIMISM GROUNDED IN
THE VANITY AND FRAILTY
OF ALL THAT IS HUMAN.
THIS SENSIBILITY,
EXPRESSED IN THE TITLE
"LIFE IS A DREAM", IS
SUSTAINED THROUGHOUT
THE PLAY.
YET AT THE SAME TIME, THIS
WORK AFFIRMS THE REALITY
OF FREE WILL, LAYING THE
RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE
CHARACTERS' WOES SQUARELY
AT THEIR OWN FEET.
IN 1636, CALDERÓN
PRESENTED ANOTHER
IMPORTANT WORK, "THE MAYOR
OF ZALAMEA", BASED ON A
DRAMA OF THE SAME
NAME BY LOPE DE VEGA.
IN 1637, PEDRO CALDERÓN DE
LA BARCA WAS MADE A KNIGHT
OF THE ORDER OF SANTIAGO.
THAT SAME YEAR HE ENTERED
MILITARY SERVICE,
SERVING UNDER THE
DUKE OF THE INFANTRY.
THE FRENCH ARMY HAD
SURROUNDED FUENTERRABIA,
AND CALDERÓN JOINED THE
ARMY THAT SET OUT TO
ITS RESCUE AND FREED
THE TOWN SQUARE.
IT WAS IN THIS SAME TIME
PERIOD THAT HE WROTE
"THE MAYOR OF ZALAMEA".
IN A WORD, THE CRIMSON
DAWN, SUN, STREAM,
ROSEBUD, MAY BIRD THAT
SINGS AMOROUSLY, APRIL'S
LAUGH THAT GEMS THE LAWN,
PINK THAT SIPS THE DEWS OF
DRAWN, ROCK THAT STANDS
IN STORM AND SHINE, LACRY
THAT DELIGHTS TO TWINE
ROUND ITS FADEST LEAVES,
THE SUN.
ALL ARE PARTS WHICH MET
IN ONE, FORM THIS WOMAN
WHO IS DIVINE.
IN 1640 A GREAT COLISEUM
WAS OPENED AT THE
PALACIO DEL BUEN
RETIRO IN MADRID.
IT WAS HERE THAT
THE FIRST OPERAS AND
INDIGENOUS MUSICAL
DRAMAS CALLED "ZARZUELAS"
OF SPANISH THEATER WOULD
BE SET UPON THE STAGE.
THIS WAS THE IDEAL SETTING
FOR CALDERÓN'S PLAYS -
EXTRAVAGANT AND DARING,
BOTH IN THEIR EFFECTS
AND IN THEIR
ALLEGORICAL COMPLEXITY.
THIS INTENSELY CREATIVE
PERIOD WAS FOLLOWED BY ONE
OF POLITICAL CRISIS.
THE SPANISH MONARCHY UNDER
PHILIP IV WAS UNABLE TO
HOLD THE FRACTIOUS UNION
OF STATES TOGETHER.
REBELLIONS AROSE IN
CATALONIA, PORTUGAL,
ARAGÓN AND ANDALUSIA.
IN 1643, THE COUNT DUKE
OF OLIVARES CEASED TO BE
PHILIP'S PROTECTOR.
THE PEACE OF WESTPHALIA
IN 1648 AND THE TREATY
OF MÜNSTER MARKED THE
INDEPENDENCE OF FLANDERS
AND LED TO A NEW EUROPEAN
ORDER THAT WOULD GRADUALLY
MAKE SPAIN INCREASINGLY
IRRELEVANT.
AS A CAVALRY SOLDIER,
CALDERÓN HAD TAKEN PART IN
THE WAR WITH CATALONIA.
HE WITNESSED THE DEATH
OF HIS BROTHER JOSÉ,
A PRESTIGIOUS
MILITARY OFFICER.
HIS BROTHER DIEGO
DIED TWO YEARS LATER.
IN 1644, PUBLIC
THEATERS WERE SHUT DOWN.
CALDERÓN WAS LEFT WITH
NOWHERE TO PRESENT HIS PLAYS
AND HE WENT INTO THE
SERVICE OF THE DUKE OF ALBA.
AT ABOUT THIS TIME,
CALDERÓN HAD A SON OUT OF
WEDLOCK, PEDRO JOSÉ, WHO
DIED AT AN EARLY AGE.
LITTLE IS KNOWN OF THE
MOTHER, CALDERÓN'S MISTRESS,
WHO ALSO DIED
IN THIS PERIOD.
THE COUNTRY'S INTERNAL
CONFLICTS, THE STATE OF
THE COURT, AND THE
CONSTANT DRUMBEAT OF DEATH
DISILLUSIONED AND
DISPIRITED CALDERÓN.
IT WAS A TIME OF
REFLECTION AND RENEWAL
FOR HIM, AND IN 1649 WHEN
THE THEATERS WERE RE-OPENED,
CALDERÓN TURNED HIS
BACK ON HIS PAST
AND ENTERED
THE PRIESTHOOD.
TWO YEARS LATER, AS CHAPLAIN
OF THE NEW KINGS OF TOLEDO,
HE MOVED TO THAT
CITY AND BEGAN
A NEW STAGE IN HIS
DRAMATIC CAREER.
HE TURNED TO THE COMPOSITION
OF AUTOS SACRAMENTALES
- ALLEGORICAL PIECES
IN WHICH THE MYSTERY
OF THE EUCHARIST WAS
ILLUSTRATED DRAMATICALLY
AND WHICH WERE PERFORMED
WITH GREAT CEREMONY
ON THE FEAST
OF CORPUS CHRISTI.
IN 1663, HE ESTABLISHED
HIMSELF ONCE AGAIN IN
COURT WHERE HE CONTINUED
TO DIRECT HIS OWN PLAYS.
HE ENTERED THE
CONGREGATION OF
NATURAL PRIESTS OF
MADRID, OF WHICH HE
EVENTUALLY BECAME
PRINCIPAL CHAPLAIN.
CALDERÓN LIVED IN
ISOLATION, DEVOTED TO HIS
PRODUCTIONS, HIS STUDIES
AND HIS MEDITATIONS.
DURING THE LAST FEW
DECADES OF HIS LIFE,
HE DEDICATED HIMSELF
PRIMARILY TO WRITING PLAYS
ON RELIGIOUS THEMES.
THE RELIGIOUS GENRE OF
THE AUTOS SACRAMENTALES
REACHED ITS PEAK WITH
THE WORK OF CALDERÓN.
IN THESE ALLEGORICAL PLAYS
HE ATTEMPTED TO EXPLAIN TO
THE AUDIENCE THE MEANING
OF RELIGIOUS DOGMAS.
IN CALDERÓN'S HANDS,
HUMANITY, SIN, JUDAISM,
PAGANISM, THE HOLY
SACRAMENTS, AND GOD HIMSELF
ARE TRANSFORMED INTO
DRAMATIC CHARACTERS.
SCENERY, MUSIC AND COSTUMES
ALL PLAYED A CRUCIAL ROLE
IN THE PRESENTATION OF
THE AUTOS SACRAMENTALES.
CITIES COMPETED WITH EACH
OTHER IN THE MAGNIFICENCE
OF THEIR PRODUCTIONS,
DEDICATING ENORMOUS
AMOUNTS OF MONEY AND
EFFORT TO SECURE THE
SERVICES OF CELEBRITY
WRITERS AND ACTORS.
EACH PLAYER I SHALL
CAST AS I DEEM BEST;
AND TO ENSURE THE PLAY
IS TO ADVANTAGE DRESSED,
WITH SPLENDID COSTUMES
AND WITH EVERY MACHINE
THAT MAY ADORN THE SCENE
IS WITH YOU PRESENTLY
TO EQUIP THE STAGE
WITH SUCH MACHINERY,
I SHALL WITH FAIR
EFFECTS TAKE EVERY EYE,
CAUSING ALL DOUBT TO FLY,
AND GIVING THE SPECTATOR
CERTAINTY OF FAITH
IN ALL THEY SEE.
AND NOW IT'S TIME THAT WE
BEGAN - I, THE DIRECTOR,
YOU, THE STAGE,
THE ACTOR MAN.
UPON THE DEATH OF
PHILIP IV IN 1665,
CHARLES II WAS
CROWNED KING.
CHARLES WAS PHYSICALLY
DISABLED AND DISFIGURED,
AND WAS BARELY ABLE
TO WALK AND SPEAK.
HIS MOTHER,
MARIANA OF AUSTRIA,
WAS ACTUALLY RULING
AND SHE ORDERED
THAT THEATRES BE
SHUT DOWN ONCE AGAIN.
HOWEVER, THEY WERE
OPENED FIVE YEARS LATER
WITH CALDERÓN'S
MYTHOLOGICAL PLAY
"WILD BEASTS ARE
TAMED BY LOVE".
CALDERÓN WAS, IN EFFECT,
THE LAST GREAT PUBLIC
INTELLECTUAL IN SPAIN.
OVER TIME, HIS DRAMATIC
WRITINGS BECAME MORE
AND MORE ALLEGORICAL
AND ABSTRACT.
THIS TREND IN HIS WORK,
HOWEVER, DID NOT MEAN THAT
HE HAD TURNED HIS
BACK ON THE WORLD.
WHILE ALREADY IN HIS
SEVENTIES, HE OVERSAW
PRODUCTION OF "THE
STATUE OF PROMETHEUS",
A METAPHORICAL PIECE THAT
PUT UPON THE STAGE
THE STATE'S STRUGGLE FOR
REFORM AND SALVATION,
AND THE DESIRE TO ACHIEVE
A UTOPIAN REPUBLIC -
ONE IN WHICH WISDOM AND
POWER CAN CO-EXIST.
AT THE CARNIVAL OF 1680,
THE LAST OF HIS PLAYS
WAS PRESENTED
AT THE PALACE:
"FATE AND THE INSIGNIA
OF LEONIDO AND MARFISA",
A COMEDY THAT FEATURED
SCENERY BY JOSEF CAUDÍ.
PEDRO CALDERÓN DE LA BARCA
DIED ON MAY 25, 1681,
AT THE AGE OF 81.
HE WAS BURIED DRESSED IN
THE RELIGIOUS ORNAMENTS
AND HABITS OF THE
ORDER OF SANTIAGO.
DEATH HAD TAKEN
CALDERÓN BY SURPRISE.
HE HAD BEEN WORKING ON A
COMEDY FOR MARIA LUISA -
THE WIFE OF CHARLES
II - AS WELL AS AN
AUTO SACRAMENTAL TO
BE PRESENTED AT THE
CORPUS CHRISTI
FESTIVAL THAT YEAR.
THROUGHOUT HIS LONG LIFE,
PEDRO CALDERÓN DE LA BARCA
GREW IN FAME AND HIS
POPULARITY WOULD ENDURE
WELL INTO THE
EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.
THE ADVENT OF
NEO-CLASSICISM
SAW CALDERÓN
FALL INTO DISFAVOR;
HIS BAROQUE
SENSIBILITIES AND
TRADITIONALIST CATHOLIC
THEMES WENT AGAINST
THE GRAIN OF CLASSICAL
SENSIBILITIES.
HOWEVER, LATE EIGHTEENTH
CENTURY ROMANTICISM
RESTORED HIS GLORY AND
HE WAS PRAISED FOR THOSE
VERY QUALITIES THAT HAD
LED TO THE CENSURE
OF NEO-CLASSICISTS:
IN PARTICULAR,
HIS CATHOLICISM AND
HIS NATIONALISM.
AS A RESULT OF HIS
NEWFOUND FAVOR,
MANY OF HIS WORKS WERE
TRANSLATED AND PUBLISHED,
AND THEY HAD A
PROFOUND INFLUENCE
ON THE PLAYWRIGHTS
OF THE TIME.
CALDERÓN BECAME THE MODEL
FOR THIS NEW KIND OF THEATER.
THE RENAISSANCE OF THE
BAROQUE STYLE IN THE
TWENTIETH CENTURY ONLY
ENHANCED CALDERÓN'S
REPUTATION, ALONG WITH
THOSE OF OTHER AUTHORS
AND PAINTERS OF THE
SPANISH GOLDEN AGE.
TODAY, PEDRO CALDERÓN DE LA
BARCA IS CONSIDERED TO BE
AN OUTSTANDING FIGURE AMONG
THE WORLD'S DRAMATISTS.
*